README.md, before:

# Dialog Driven Delivery (D3) — Tooling

[D3](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) is a methodology for AI-enabled software delivery, built from real engagements by practitioners at Equal Experts. It helps teams — not just individuals — work effectively with AI by focusing on collaboration and context, not tooling.

**This repository provides tooling that implements D3's workflow across multiple AI coding platforms.** It turns the methodology's principles into a concrete, repeatable process: capture conversations, create structured specifications, and decompose features into implementable stories.

Works with your existing tools. Built-in providers for Atlassian (Confluence + Jira) and Markdown (local files + git). Expandable to any specification storage or work tracking system through pluggable provider skills.

### Supported Platforms

| Platform | Status | Installation |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| **Claude Code** | Full support | Plugin marketplace |
| **OpenAI Codex** | Full support | Install script |
| **GitHub Copilot** | Full support | Install script |
| **Cursor** | Full support | Install script |

---

## Quick Start

### 1. Install D3

**Claude Code** (plugin marketplace):

```bash
claude plugin marketplace add cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery
claude plugin install d3@d3-marketplace
claude plugin install d3-markdown@d3-marketplace   # or d3-atlassian
```

**Codex, Copilot, or Cursor** (install script):

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- <platform>
```

Where `<platform>` is `codex`, `copilot`, or `cursor`.

Or copy files manually from `dist/<platform>/` into your project.

### 2. Configure Your Provider

Add D3 configuration to your project's config file. The config file location varies by platform:

| Platform | Config File |
|----------|------------|
| Claude Code | `CLAUDE.md` |
| Codex | `AGENTS.md` |
| Copilot | `.github/copilot-instructions.md` |
| Cursor | `.cursor/rules/d3-config/RULE.md` |

See the [Configuration](#configuration) section for provider setup.

### 3. Use D3 Commands

Command invocation varies by platform:

| Command | Claude Code | Codex | Copilot | Cursor |
|---------|------------|-------|---------|--------|
| Create spec | `/d3:create-spec` | `$d3-create-spec` | `@d3-create-spec` | `@d3-create-spec` |
| Refine spec | `/d3:refine-spec` | `$d3-refine-spec` | `@d3-refine-spec` | `@d3-refine-spec` |
| Decompose | `/d3:decompose` | `$d3-decompose` | `@d3-decompose` | `@d3-decompose` |
| Capture transcript | `/d3:capture-transcript` | `$d3-capture-transcript` | `@d3-capture-transcript` | `@d3-capture-transcript` |
| Create ADR | `/d3:create-adr` | `$d3-create-adr` | `@d3-create-adr` | `@d3-create-adr` |

### Complete Feature Development Flow

```
Capture Phase (optional)  →  create-spec  →  refine-spec (iterative)  →  decompose
     ↓                           ↓                  ↓                       ↓
Meeting transcript      Feature specification   Updated spec       Epic + User Stories
                        (Product + Technical)   with new info      with acceptance criteria
```

---

## Methodology

D3 is grounded in [three principles](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) observed across real engagements:

1. **Cross-functional dialogue is the source** — Product, engineering, and design conversations create context that documentation alone cannot. Capture the dialogue, not just the outcome.
2. **Context engineering is the core skill** — AI follows context. The richer and more structured that context, the better the output. Structuring specifications and curating decisions determines AI effectiveness.
3. **Human accountability is non-negotiable** — AI drafts. Humans review. Every specification, every story, every decision passes through human judgment.

This tooling applies those principles through a concrete workflow:

- **Feature-centric**: Specifications at feature level, not task level
- **Transcript-first**: Commands accept meeting transcripts as primary input
- **Incremental delivery**: Features decompose into independently deliverable stories
- **Explicit over implicit**: Uncertainties are marked, not assumed — prevents AI hallucination
- **Tool-agnostic**: Provider architecture works with whatever tools your team already uses

---

## Installation

### Claude Code (Plugin Marketplace)

```bash
# Add the D3 marketplace
claude plugin marketplace add cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery

# Install core + provider
claude plugin install d3@d3-marketplace
claude plugin install d3-markdown@d3-marketplace    # Local files + git
claude plugin install d3-atlassian@d3-marketplace   # Confluence + Jira
```

### Codex

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- codex
```

This places files in `.agents/skills/` and creates `AGENTS.md` with default configuration.

### GitHub Copilot

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- copilot
```

This places agent files in `.github/agents/` and creates `.github/copilot-instructions.md` with default configuration.

### Cursor

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- cursor
```

This places rule files in `.cursor/rules/` with default configuration.

### Manual Installation

Alternatively, copy files directly from the `dist/` directory:

```bash
# Codex
cp -r dist/codex/.agents your-project/
cp dist/codex/AGENTS.md your-project/

# Copilot
cp -r dist/copilot/.github your-project/

# Cursor
cp -r dist/cursor/.cursor your-project/
```

### Prerequisites

**Required:**
- **Git** for version control
- One of the supported AI coding platforms installed and configured

**Provider-specific (choose one or more):**

| Provider | Requirements | Best for |
|----------|-------------|----------|
| **Markdown** | No external services | Lightweight, git-native teams |
| **Atlassian** | Confluence + Jira + Atlassian MCP Server | Enterprise teams |

---

## Configuration

D3 configuration tells the agent which providers to use and how to connect to your tools. Add it to your platform's config file.

### Markdown Provider (Lightweight)

```markdown
## D3 Configuration

### Spec Provider
**Skill:** markdown-spec-provider
**Configuration:**
- Specs Directory: ./specs

### Story Provider
**Skill:** markdown-story-provider
**Configuration:**
- Stories Directory: ./stories

### Transcript Provider
**Skill:** markdown-transcript-provider
**Configuration:**
- Transcripts Directory: ./transcripts
```

### Atlassian Provider (Enterprise)

```markdown
## D3 Configuration

### Spec Provider
**Skill:** atlassian-spec-provider
**Configuration:**
- Cloud ID: your-cloud-id
- Default Location: PROJ
- spaceId: 1234567
- Default parent page: https://yoursite.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PROJ/pages/123456

### Story Provider
**Skill:** atlassian-story-provider
**Configuration:**
- Cloud ID: your-cloud-id
- Default Project: PROJ

### Transcript Provider
**Skill:** atlassian-transcript-provider
**Configuration:**
- Cloud ID: your-cloud-id
- Default Location: PROJ
- spaceId: 1234567
- Default parent page: https://yoursite.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PROJ/pages/123456/Transcripts
```

### ADR Provider (Optional)

By default, ADRs use the Spec Provider. To store ADRs separately:

```markdown
### ADR Provider
**Skill:** markdown-spec-provider
**Configuration:**
- Specs Directory: ./docs/adrs
```

### Template Customisation (Optional)

D3 includes default templates via the `d3-templates` skill that work out of the box. Only customise if you need domain-specific sections, compliance requirements, or team conventions.

**Default templates included:**
- Feature Product Spec (5 sections)
- Feature Technical Spec (8 sections)
- User Story (Given-When-Then acceptance criteria)
- Meeting Transcript (summary, decisions, action items, open questions)
- ADR (MADR v4 format)

**To customise:**

1. Copy default templates to your repo:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p .d3/templates
   # Copy from the d3-templates skill references directory
   ```

2. Configure custom paths in your config file:
   ```markdown
   ### Templates
     - Feature Product Spec: ./.d3/templates/feature-product-spec.md
     - Feature Technical Spec: ./.d3/templates/feature-tech-spec.md
     - User Story: ./.d3/templates/user-story.md
     - Meeting Transcript: ./.d3/templates/meeting-transcript.md
     - ADR: ./.d3/templates/adr.md
   ```

---

## Commands

| Command | Phase | Purpose |
|---------|-------|---------|
| `create-spec` | Planning | Create feature specification from conversation, transcript, or document |
| `create-adr` | Planning | Record architectural decisions as immutable ADRs (MADR v4) |
| `refine-spec` | Planning | Update specifications with new information |
| `decompose` | Planning | Break feature into INVEST-compliant user stories |
| `capture-transcript` | Capture | Capture and structure a meeting transcript |

### When to Use Each Command

- **Had a meeting?** → `capture-transcript`
- **Starting a feature?** → `create-spec`
- **Made an architectural decision?** → `create-adr`
- **Got new information?** → `refine-spec`
- **Ready to implement?** → `decompose`

After decomposition, implement using your team's existing workflow.

### Workflow

```
Cross-functional Meeting/Discussion
        ↓
capture-transcript (optional — capture and structure the meeting)
        ↓
create-spec (paste transcript/document/description)
        ↓
Specification with BOTH Product & Technical Specs
(fills what's known, leaves rest empty)
        ↓
[Progressive Refinement as information becomes available]
        ↓
refine-spec (paste any new information)
        ↓
Updated Specification (product, technical, or both)
        ↓
[Continue refining until ready]
        ↓
decompose (specify project, paste transcript or discuss)
        ↓
Epic + User Stories (linked to specification with dependencies)
        ↓
[Implementation using your team's workflow]
```

### Architectural Decision Workflow

```
Architectural discussion (meeting/transcript)
        ↓
create-adr (paste transcript or describe decision)
        ↓
ADR created (Context, Decision, Alternatives, Consequences)
        ↓
refine-spec (incorporate ADR into spec)
        ↓
Spec's "Architectural Context > Relevant ADRs" section updated
```

ADRs are immutable records. If a decision changes, create a new ADR that supersedes the old one.

---

## Key Features

### Uncertainty Markers

When AI generates specifications, it can hallucinate plausible-sounding details that were never discussed. D3 prevents this with explicit uncertainty markers:

- `[OPEN QUESTION: text]` — User decision needed
- `[DECISION PENDING: options]` — Valid choices exist, decision deferred
- `[ASSUMPTION: statement]` — Inference made from context, needs validation
- `[CLARIFICATION NEEDED: aspect]` — Requirement is vague

```markdown
BAD (silent hallucination):
Users authenticate via OAuth2 using Google provider

GOOD (explicit uncertainty):
Users authenticate via [OPEN QUESTION: OAuth2, password, or social login?]
```

### Pragmatic Templates

Feature specs use a **streamlined 5-section product template** and **8-section technical template**. This produces 2-3 pages instead of 5-10. Faster to write, faster to review, still captures everything that matters.

### Conversational Workflow

Commands ask for meeting transcripts (preferred input), work conversationally if none available, propose options with pros/cons, and confirm before creating artefacts.

### Provider Architecture

```
D3 Core Commands (Tool-Agnostic)
    ├── capture-transcript → Uses Transcript Provider
    ├── create-spec        → Uses Spec Provider
    ├── create-adr         → Uses ADR Provider (falls back to Spec Provider)
    ├── refine-spec        → Uses Spec Provider
    └── decompose          → Uses Spec Provider + Story Provider

Providers (Pluggable)
    ├── Atlassian (Confluence + Jira)   — built-in
    ├── Markdown (local files + git)    — built-in
    └── Custom (Notion, Linear, etc.)   — expandable
```

### Creating Custom Providers

1. Review an existing provider (e.g. `d3-markdown/skills/markdown-spec-provider/SKILL.md`)
2. Implement the provider operations for your tool
3. Configure your config file to reference the new provider
4. D3 commands work automatically with any provider

**Provider operations:**
- **Spec**: `list_locations`, `create_spec`, `get_spec`, `update_spec`, `search_specs`
- **Story**: `list_projects`, `get_issue_types`, `create_epic`, `create_story`, `link_issues`
- **Transcript**: `list_locations`, `store_transcript`, `get_transcript`, `list_transcripts`, `search_transcripts`

---

## Repository Structure

The Claude Code plugin files (`d3/`, `d3-markdown/`, `d3-atlassian/`) are the source of truth. They use platform-agnostic natural language (e.g. "the read tool", "the D3 config file"). The generator copies these to other platforms, transforming frontmatter and directory structure. Each platform gets a `d3-platform` reference that maps generic terms to platform-specific tools.

```
dialog-driven-delivery/
├── d3/                              # Core plugin — commands, skills, templates
├── d3-markdown/                     # Markdown provider plugin (local files + git)
├── d3-atlassian/                    # Atlassian provider plugin (Confluence + Jira)
├── d3.platform.yaml                 # Platform tool/config mappings
├── metadata/                        # Plugin metadata (d3.yaml, d3-markdown.yaml, d3-atlassian.yaml)
├── config/
│   └── example-config.md            # Default provider configuration
├── generate.py                      # Generator — copies source to other platforms
├── install.sh                       # Install script for non-Claude platforms
└── dist/                            # Generated — other platforms
    ├── codex/                       # .agents/skills/ + AGENTS.md
    ├── copilot/                     # .github/agents/*.agent.md + copilot-instructions.md
    └── cursor/                      # .cursor/rules/ + d3-config
```

### How It Works

Source files use natural language for tool references and configuration. The generator copies files to each platform's directory structure, transforms frontmatter as needed, and generates a `d3-platform` reference from `d3.platform.yaml` that maps generic terms to platform-specific values.

**Platform reference mappings (from `d3.platform.yaml`):**

| Reference | Claude Code | Codex | Copilot | Cursor |
|----------|------------|-------|---------|--------|
| "the D3 config file" | `CLAUDE.md` | `AGENTS.md` | `.github/copilot-instructions.md` | `.cursor/rules/d3-config/RULE.md` |
| "the read tool" | `Read` | `read` | `read` | `read` |
| "the write tool" | `Write` | `write` | `edit` | `edit` |
| "the search tool" | `Grep` | `search` | `search` | `search` |
| "the glob tool" | `Glob` | `glob` | `search` | `search` |
| "the shell tool" | `Bash` | `execute` | `execute` | `execute` |
| skill invocation | `Skill(skill=...)` | `$name args` | `@name args` | `@name args` |

---

## Development

### Generator

The `generate.py` script copies source files to each platform's directory structure.

```bash
# Generate for a specific platform
python generate.py --platform claude    # Output: d3/ (metadata + platform ref only)
python generate.py --platform codex     # Output: dist/codex/
python generate.py --platform copilot   # Output: dist/copilot/
python generate.py --platform cursor    # Output: dist/cursor/

# Generate all platforms
python generate.py --all
```

For Claude, the generator only produces metadata files (`plugin.json`, `marketplace.json`) and the `d3-platform` reference. Other platforms get the full copy to `dist/<platform>/`.

**Requirements:** Python 3 with PyYAML (`pip install pyyaml`).

### Pre-commit Hook

A pre-commit hook automatically regenerates platform files when source files change.

```bash
# Setup (once after cloning)
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install
```

The hook runs `python generate.py --all` when you commit changes to `d3/`, `d3-markdown/`, `d3-atlassian/`, `d3.platform.yaml`, `metadata/`, or `config/`.

### Install Script

The `install.sh` script downloads pre-generated files from this repository and places them in the correct directories for each platform.

```bash
# Usage
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- <platform>

# What it does per platform:
# codex    → .agents/skills/*  + AGENTS.md
# copilot  → .github/agents/*.agent.md + .github/copilot-instructions.md
# cursor   → .cursor/rules/*
```

The script creates config files with sensible defaults if they don't already exist.

### Local Testing

**Claude Code** (using plugin directories):

```bash
# Test in another project using local plugins
cd /path/to/test-project
claude --plugin-dir /path/to/dialog-driven-delivery/d3 \
       --plugin-dir /path/to/dialog-driven-delivery/d3-markdown
```

**Other platforms** (copy to test project):

```bash
# Generate platform output
python generate.py --platform codex

# Copy to another project
cp -r dist/codex/.agents /path/to/your-project/
cp dist/codex/AGENTS.md /path/to/your-project/
```

### Making Changes

1. Edit source files in `d3/`, `d3-markdown/`, or `d3-atlassian/`
2. Commit — the pre-commit hook regenerates `dist/` automatically
3. Test with your target platform

---

## Best Practices

### For Feature Planning
1. **Record your meetings** — transcripts are the best input
2. **Be specific** — discuss concrete examples and scenarios
3. **Define boundaries** — what's in scope and out of scope

### For Story Decomposition
1. **Natural boundaries** — break at logical workflow points
2. **Independent stories** — minimise dependencies
3. **Complete ACs** — cover happy path, errors, edge cases

### For Refinement
1. **Learn and adapt** — refine based on development learnings
2. **Split when needed** — don't force large stories
3. **Update dependencies** — keep the dependency graph current

---

## Troubleshooting

### "I don't have meeting transcripts"

All commands work conversationally — select "Describe conversationally" and answer the agent's questions.

### "Can I use this with other tools?"

Yes. D3 is tool-agnostic through its provider architecture. Use Confluence + Jira, Markdown + Git, or create custom providers for Notion, Linear, GitHub Issues, etc.

### "How do I implement the stories?"

Use your team's existing development workflow. D3 focuses on the planning phase — turning conversations into structured context and implementable stories.

---

## License

Open methodology, openly shared. Modify to fit your team's needs.

---

## Support

- Review individual skill files for detailed documentation
- [D3 Methodology](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) — principles and approach
- [Report issues](https://github.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/issues)

---

*Built from real engagements. Designed for how teams actually work.*

*[Learn more about the D3 methodology](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) | Developed with [Equal Experts](https://www.equalexperts.com/)*

Commit message:

standardise config to d3.config.md and split copilot prompts from agents

README.md, after:

# Dialog Driven Delivery (D3) — Tooling

[D3](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) is a methodology for AI-enabled software delivery, built from real engagements by practitioners at Equal Experts. It helps teams — not just individuals — work effectively with AI by focusing on collaboration and context, not tooling.

**This repository provides tooling that implements D3's workflow across multiple AI coding platforms.** It turns the methodology's principles into a concrete, repeatable process: capture conversations, create structured specifications, and decompose features into implementable stories.

Works with your existing tools. Built-in providers for Atlassian (Confluence + Jira) and Markdown (local files + git). Expandable to any specification storage or work tracking system through pluggable provider skills.

### Supported Platforms

| Platform | Status | Installation |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| **Claude Code** | Full support | Plugin marketplace |
| **OpenAI Codex** | Full support | Install script |
| **GitHub Copilot** | Full support | Install script |
| **Cursor** | Full support | Install script |

---

## Quick Start

### 1. Install D3

**Claude Code** (plugin marketplace):

```bash
claude plugin marketplace add cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery
claude plugin install d3@d3-marketplace
claude plugin install d3-markdown@d3-marketplace   # or d3-atlassian
```

**Codex, Copilot, or Cursor** (install script):

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- <platform>
```

Where `<platform>` is `codex`, `copilot`, or `cursor`.

Or copy files manually from `dist/<platform>/` into your project.

### 2. Configure Your Provider

Edit `d3.config.md` in your project root to configure providers. This file is the same across all platforms.

See the [Configuration](#configuration) section for provider setup.

### 3. Use D3 Commands

Command invocation varies by platform:

| Command | Claude Code | Codex | Copilot | Cursor |
|---------|------------|-------|---------|--------|
| Create spec | `/d3:create-spec` | `$d3-create-spec` | `@d3-create-spec` | `@d3-create-spec` |
| Refine spec | `/d3:refine-spec` | `$d3-refine-spec` | `@d3-refine-spec` | `@d3-refine-spec` |
| Decompose | `/d3:decompose` | `$d3-decompose` | `@d3-decompose` | `@d3-decompose` |
| Capture transcript | `/d3:capture-transcript` | `$d3-capture-transcript` | `@d3-capture-transcript` | `@d3-capture-transcript` |
| Create ADR | `/d3:create-adr` | `$d3-create-adr` | `@d3-create-adr` | `@d3-create-adr` |

### Complete Feature Development Flow

```
Capture Phase (optional)  →  create-spec  →  refine-spec (iterative)  →  decompose
     ↓                           ↓                  ↓                       ↓
Meeting transcript      Feature specification   Updated spec       Epic + User Stories
                        (Product + Technical)   with new info      with acceptance criteria
```

---

## Methodology

D3 is grounded in [three principles](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) observed across real engagements:

1. **Cross-functional dialogue is the source** — Product, engineering, and design conversations create context that documentation alone cannot. Capture the dialogue, not just the outcome.
2. **Context engineering is the core skill** — AI follows context. The richer and more structured that context, the better the output. Structuring specifications and curating decisions determines AI effectiveness.
3. **Human accountability is non-negotiable** — AI drafts. Humans review. Every specification, every story, every decision passes through human judgment.

This tooling applies those principles through a concrete workflow:

- **Feature-centric**: Specifications at feature level, not task level
- **Transcript-first**: Commands accept meeting transcripts as primary input
- **Incremental delivery**: Features decompose into independently deliverable stories
- **Explicit over implicit**: Uncertainties are marked, not assumed — prevents AI hallucination
- **Tool-agnostic**: Provider architecture works with whatever tools your team already uses

---

## Installation

### Claude Code (Plugin Marketplace)

```bash
# Add the D3 marketplace
claude plugin marketplace add cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery

# Install core + provider
claude plugin install d3@d3-marketplace
claude plugin install d3-markdown@d3-marketplace    # Local files + git
claude plugin install d3-atlassian@d3-marketplace   # Confluence + Jira
```

### Codex

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- codex
```

This places files in `.agents/skills/` and creates `AGENTS.md` with default configuration.

### GitHub Copilot

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- copilot
```

This places agent files in `.github/agents/` and creates `.github/copilot-instructions.md` with default configuration.

### Cursor

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- cursor
```

This places rule files in `.cursor/rules/` with default configuration.

### Manual Installation

Alternatively, copy files directly from the `dist/` directory:

```bash
# Codex
cp -r dist/codex/.agents your-project/
cp dist/codex/AGENTS.md your-project/

# Copilot
cp -r dist/copilot/.github your-project/

# Cursor
cp -r dist/cursor/.cursor your-project/
```

### Prerequisites

**Required:**
- **Git** for version control
- One of the supported AI coding platforms installed and configured

**Provider-specific (choose one or more):**

| Provider | Requirements | Best for |
|----------|-------------|----------|
| **Markdown** | No external services | Lightweight, git-native teams |
| **Atlassian** | Confluence + Jira + Atlassian MCP Server | Enterprise teams |

---

## Configuration

D3 configuration tells the agent which providers to use and how to connect to your tools. Edit `d3.config.md` in your project root.

### Markdown Provider (Lightweight)

```markdown
## D3 Configuration

### Spec Provider
**Skill:** markdown-spec-provider
**Configuration:**
- Specs Directory: ./specs

### Story Provider
**Skill:** markdown-story-provider
**Configuration:**
- Stories Directory: ./stories

### Transcript Provider
**Skill:** markdown-transcript-provider
**Configuration:**
- Transcripts Directory: ./transcripts
```

### Atlassian Provider (Enterprise)

```markdown
## D3 Configuration

### Spec Provider
**Skill:** atlassian-spec-provider
**Configuration:**
- Cloud ID: your-cloud-id
- Default Location: PROJ
- spaceId: 1234567
- Default parent page: https://yoursite.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PROJ/pages/123456

### Story Provider
**Skill:** atlassian-story-provider
**Configuration:**
- Cloud ID: your-cloud-id
- Default Project: PROJ

### Transcript Provider
**Skill:** atlassian-transcript-provider
**Configuration:**
- Cloud ID: your-cloud-id
- Default Location: PROJ
- spaceId: 1234567
- Default parent page: https://yoursite.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PROJ/pages/123456/Transcripts
```

### ADR Provider (Optional)

By default, ADRs use the Spec Provider. To store ADRs separately:

```markdown
### ADR Provider
**Skill:** markdown-spec-provider
**Configuration:**
- Specs Directory: ./docs/adrs
```

### Template Customisation (Optional)

D3 includes default templates via the `d3-templates` skill that work out of the box. Only customise if you need domain-specific sections, compliance requirements, or team conventions.

**Default templates included:**
- Feature Product Spec (5 sections)
- Feature Technical Spec (8 sections)
- User Story (Given-When-Then acceptance criteria)
- Meeting Transcript (summary, decisions, action items, open questions)
- ADR (MADR v4 format)

**To customise:**

1. Copy default templates to your repo:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p .d3/templates
   # Copy from the d3-templates skill references directory
   ```

2. Configure custom paths in your config file:
   ```markdown
   ### Templates
     - Feature Product Spec: ./.d3/templates/feature-product-spec.md
     - Feature Technical Spec: ./.d3/templates/feature-tech-spec.md
     - User Story: ./.d3/templates/user-story.md
     - Meeting Transcript: ./.d3/templates/meeting-transcript.md
     - ADR: ./.d3/templates/adr.md
   ```

---

## Commands

| Command | Phase | Purpose |
|---------|-------|---------|
| `create-spec` | Planning | Create feature specification from conversation, transcript, or document |
| `create-adr` | Planning | Record architectural decisions as immutable ADRs (MADR v4) |
| `refine-spec` | Planning | Update specifications with new information |
| `decompose` | Planning | Break feature into INVEST-compliant user stories |
| `capture-transcript` | Capture | Capture and structure a meeting transcript |

### When to Use Each Command

- **Had a meeting?** → `capture-transcript`
- **Starting a feature?** → `create-spec`
- **Made an architectural decision?** → `create-adr`
- **Got new information?** → `refine-spec`
- **Ready to implement?** → `decompose`

After decomposition, implement using your team's existing workflow.

### Workflow

```
Cross-functional Meeting/Discussion
        ↓
capture-transcript (optional — capture and structure the meeting)
        ↓
create-spec (paste transcript/document/description)
        ↓
Specification with BOTH Product & Technical Specs
(fills what's known, leaves rest empty)
        ↓
[Progressive Refinement as information becomes available]
        ↓
refine-spec (paste any new information)
        ↓
Updated Specification (product, technical, or both)
        ↓
[Continue refining until ready]
        ↓
decompose (specify project, paste transcript or discuss)
        ↓
Epic + User Stories (linked to specification with dependencies)
        ↓
[Implementation using your team's workflow]
```

### Architectural Decision Workflow

```
Architectural discussion (meeting/transcript)
        ↓
create-adr (paste transcript or describe decision)
        ↓
ADR created (Context, Decision, Alternatives, Consequences)
        ↓
refine-spec (incorporate ADR into spec)
        ↓
Spec's "Architectural Context > Relevant ADRs" section updated
```

ADRs are immutable records. If a decision changes, create a new ADR that supersedes the old one.

---

## Key Features

### Uncertainty Markers

When AI generates specifications, it can hallucinate plausible-sounding details that were never discussed. D3 prevents this with explicit uncertainty markers:

- `[OPEN QUESTION: text]` — User decision needed
- `[DECISION PENDING: options]` — Valid choices exist, decision deferred
- `[ASSUMPTION: statement]` — Inference made from context, needs validation
- `[CLARIFICATION NEEDED: aspect]` — Requirement is vague

```markdown
BAD (silent hallucination):
Users authenticate via OAuth2 using Google provider

GOOD (explicit uncertainty):
Users authenticate via [OPEN QUESTION: OAuth2, password, or social login?]
```

### Pragmatic Templates

Feature specs use a **streamlined 5-section product template** and **8-section technical template**. This produces 2-3 pages instead of 5-10. Faster to write, faster to review, still captures everything that matters.

### Conversational Workflow

Commands ask for meeting transcripts (preferred input), work conversationally if none available, propose options with pros/cons, and confirm before creating artefacts.

### Provider Architecture

```
D3 Core Commands (Tool-Agnostic)
    ├── capture-transcript → Uses Transcript Provider
    ├── create-spec        → Uses Spec Provider
    ├── create-adr         → Uses ADR Provider (falls back to Spec Provider)
    ├── refine-spec        → Uses Spec Provider
    └── decompose          → Uses Spec Provider + Story Provider

Providers (Pluggable)
    ├── Atlassian (Confluence + Jira)   — built-in
    ├── Markdown (local files + git)    — built-in
    └── Custom (Notion, Linear, etc.)   — expandable
```

### Creating Custom Providers

1. Review an existing provider (e.g. `d3-markdown/skills/markdown-spec-provider/SKILL.md`)
2. Implement the provider operations for your tool
3. Configure your config file to reference the new provider
4. D3 commands work automatically with any provider

**Provider operations:**
- **Spec**: `list_locations`, `create_spec`, `get_spec`, `update_spec`, `search_specs`
- **Story**: `list_projects`, `get_issue_types`, `create_epic`, `create_story`, `link_issues`
- **Transcript**: `list_locations`, `store_transcript`, `get_transcript`, `list_transcripts`, `search_transcripts`

---

## Repository Structure

The Claude Code plugin files (`d3/`, `d3-markdown/`, `d3-atlassian/`) are the source of truth. They use platform-agnostic natural language (e.g. "the read tool") and reference `d3.config.md` directly. The generator copies these to other platforms, transforming frontmatter and directory structure. Each platform gets a `d3-platform` reference that maps generic tool terms to platform-specific values.

```
dialog-driven-delivery/
├── d3/                              # Core plugin — commands, skills, templates
├── d3-markdown/                     # Markdown provider plugin (local files + git)
├── d3-atlassian/                    # Atlassian provider plugin (Confluence + Jira)
├── d3.platform.yaml                 # Platform tool/config mappings
├── metadata/                        # Plugin metadata (d3.yaml, d3-markdown.yaml, d3-atlassian.yaml)
├── config/
│   └── example-config.md            # Default provider configuration
├── generate.py                      # Generator — copies source to other platforms
├── install.sh                       # Install script for non-Claude platforms
└── dist/                            # Generated — other platforms
    ├── codex/                       # .agents/skills/ + d3.config.md
    ├── copilot/                     # .github/prompts/ + .github/agents/ + d3.config.md
    └── cursor/                      # .cursor/rules/ + d3.config.md
```

### How It Works

Source files use natural language for tool references and configuration. The generator copies files to each platform's directory structure, transforms frontmatter as needed, and generates a `d3-platform` reference from `d3.platform.yaml` that maps generic terms to platform-specific values.

**Platform reference mappings (from `d3.platform.yaml`):**

| Reference | Claude Code | Codex | Copilot | Cursor |
|----------|------------|-------|---------|--------|
| "the read tool" | `Read` | `read` | `read` | `read` |
| "the write tool" | `Write` | `write` | `edit` | `edit` |
| "the search tool" | `Grep` | `search` | `search` | `search` |
| "the glob tool" | `Glob` | `glob` | `search` | `search` |
| "the shell tool" | `Bash` | `execute` | `execute` | `execute` |
| skill invocation | `Skill(skill=...)` | `$name args` | `@name args` | `@name args` |

---

## Development

### Generator

The `generate.py` script copies source files to each platform's directory structure.

```bash
# Generate for a specific platform
python generate.py --platform claude    # Output: d3/ (metadata + platform ref only)
python generate.py --platform codex     # Output: dist/codex/
python generate.py --platform copilot   # Output: dist/copilot/
python generate.py --platform cursor    # Output: dist/cursor/

# Generate all platforms
python generate.py --all
```

For Claude, the generator only produces metadata files (`plugin.json`, `marketplace.json`) and the `d3-platform` reference. Other platforms get the full copy to `dist/<platform>/`.

**Requirements:** Python 3 with PyYAML (`pip install pyyaml`).

### Pre-commit Hook

A pre-commit hook automatically regenerates platform files when source files change.

```bash
# Setup (once after cloning)
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install
```

The hook runs `python generate.py --all` when you commit changes to `d3/`, `d3-markdown/`, `d3-atlassian/`, `d3.platform.yaml`, `metadata/`, or `config/`.

### Install Script

The `install.sh` script downloads pre-generated files from this repository and places them in the correct directories for each platform.

```bash
# Usage
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/main/install.sh | bash -s -- <platform>

# What it does per platform:
# codex    → .agents/skills/*  + AGENTS.md
# copilot  → .github/agents/*.agent.md + .github/copilot-instructions.md
# cursor   → .cursor/rules/*
```

The script creates config files with sensible defaults if they don't already exist.

### Local Testing

**Claude Code** (using plugin directories):

```bash
# Test in another project using local plugins
cd /path/to/test-project
claude --plugin-dir /path/to/dialog-driven-delivery/d3 \
       --plugin-dir /path/to/dialog-driven-delivery/d3-markdown
```

**Other platforms** (copy to test project):

```bash
# Generate platform output
python generate.py --platform codex

# Copy to another project
cp -r dist/codex/.agents /path/to/your-project/
cp dist/codex/AGENTS.md /path/to/your-project/
```

### Making Changes

1. Edit source files in `d3/`, `d3-markdown/`, or `d3-atlassian/`
2. Commit — the pre-commit hook regenerates `dist/` automatically
3. Test with your target platform

---

## Best Practices

### For Feature Planning
1. **Record your meetings** — transcripts are the best input
2. **Be specific** — discuss concrete examples and scenarios
3. **Define boundaries** — what's in scope and out of scope

### For Story Decomposition
1. **Natural boundaries** — break at logical workflow points
2. **Independent stories** — minimise dependencies
3. **Complete ACs** — cover happy path, errors, edge cases

### For Refinement
1. **Learn and adapt** — refine based on development learnings
2. **Split when needed** — don't force large stories
3. **Update dependencies** — keep the dependency graph current

---

## Troubleshooting

### "I don't have meeting transcripts"

All commands work conversationally — select "Describe conversationally" and answer the agent's questions.

### "Can I use this with other tools?"

Yes. D3 is tool-agnostic through its provider architecture. Use Confluence + Jira, Markdown + Git, or create custom providers for Notion, Linear, GitHub Issues, etc.

### "How do I implement the stories?"

Use your team's existing development workflow. D3 focuses on the planning phase — turning conversations into structured context and implementable stories.

---

## License

Open methodology, openly shared. Modify to fit your team's needs.

---

## Support

- Review individual skill files for detailed documentation
- [D3 Methodology](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) — principles and approach
- [Report issues](https://github.com/cdiniz/dialog-driven-delivery/issues)

---

*Built from real engagements. Designed for how teams actually work.*

*[Learn more about the D3 methodology](https://dialogdrivendelivery.com/) | Developed with [Equal Experts](https://www.equalexperts.com/)*
