d3/commands/refine-spec.md, before:

---
description: Refine existing feature specifications based on new information (meeting transcripts, technical decisions, feedback, or discussions). Automatically detects whether changes are product-focused, technical, or both. Updates only affected sections while preserving existing content. When stories already exist for the spec, analyzes impact and proposes story updates. Use when updating specs, adding details to existing documentation, incorporating meeting notes into specs, or when user mentions refining/updating/improving an existing specification.
---

## Core Principle

**Update only what has new information. Preserve everything else.**

Automatically detect which sections need updating - Product, Technical, or both. Don't fill empty sections just because they exist.

**When stories exist:** Spec changes cascade to affected stories. Update story acceptance criteria, scope, and descriptions to stay in sync.

---

## Workflow

### 1. Detect Provider, Templates, and Spec Mode
- Read `d3.config.md` for D3 config
- Search for ### D3 Config  ### Templates
- Read `Spec Mode` from Spec Provider configuration (default: `combined` when absent)
- If templates (tech and product spec templates) are not configure use skill d3-templates
- Store for later steps

### 2. Fetch Specification
Command accepts spec identifier, URL, or title in `$ARGUMENTS`.

Use provider's `get_spec`:
- Identifier → Use directly
- URL → Extract identifier
- Title → Search, then get_spec

**If Spec Mode is `separated`:**
After fetching, detect which type it is (product or tech) from the title suffix or content structure.
Read the `**Companion Spec:**` header line to identify the paired spec.
Do NOT fetch the companion yet — wait until Step 6 determines whether changes affect both sections.

### 3. Detect Existing Stories
Find the epic matching the spec title and list all its children (stories, tasks, or any issue type).
- Store epic key and child list for later impact analysis
- If no epic or no children found, skip story impact steps later

### 4. Analyze Current State
Display coverage:
```
**Specification:** [Title] - [URL]
**Last Modified:** [Date]

Current Coverage:
- Product: ~[X]% ([sections with content])
- Technical: ~[Y]% ([sections with content])
- Open Questions: [Z] product, [W] technical

Linked Stories: [None / Epic KEY-123 with N stories]
```

### 5. Request Refinement Input
Ask user:
```
How would you like to provide new information?
A) Paste meeting transcript
B) Paste updated documentation
C) Describe changes
D) Paste review feedback
```

### 6. Analyze New Information

**Smart Detection:**
- Identify what's new vs. what exists
- Determine which sections are affected
- Detect if Product, Technical, or both need updates

**CRITICAL - Non-Greedy Updates:**

Update ONLY sections explicitly addressed in new input.

**DO NOT:**
- Invent details not discussed (endpoints, schemas, architectures)
- Elaborate beyond what was stated
- Fill empty sections just because they're empty
- Remove `_To be defined_` without replacement content
- Treat template examples as prompts to fill

**DO:**
- Add only explicitly stated information
- Replace placeholders when discussed
- Add uncertainty markers for ambiguous info
- Preserve empty sections if not discussed

**Section-by-Section Process:**
1. Does new information explicitly address this section?
2. YES → Update with actual content
3. NO → Leave unchanged (existing content OR placeholder)

**If Spec Mode is `separated` — Companion Fetch Optimisation:**
After analysing the new information, determine if changes affect Product sections, Technical sections, or both.
- If changes affect only the fetched spec type → proceed with just that spec, no companion fetch needed
- If changes affect both → fetch the companion spec via `get_spec` using the identifier from the `**Companion Spec:**` header

### 7. Show Proposed Changes

Present clear before/after:
```
Proposed Changes:

## 📋 Product Specification Changes

### [Section Name]
BEFORE: [Current content]
AFTER: [Proposed content]
Rationale: [Why]
Type: [Addition/Modification/Clarification/Resolution]

## 🔧 Technical Specification Changes

### [Section Name]
[Same pattern]

---
Summary:
- Product: [X sections updated, Y questions resolved]
- Technical: [X sections updated, Y questions resolved]
- Resolved: [List]
- New uncertainties: [List]

Does this look correct?
```

### 8. Analyze Story Impact (if stories exist)

**Skip this step if no epic/stories were found in Step 3.**

For each spec change, determine if it affects existing stories:

**Impact Categories:**
- **AC Change:** Spec change modifies requirements covered by a story's acceptance criteria
- **Scope Change:** Spec change adds/removes functionality within a story's scope
- **New Story Needed:** Spec change introduces a new workflow not covered by any existing story
- **Story Obsolete:** Spec change removes functionality that was a story's primary purpose
- **No Impact:** Spec change is informational or affects sections not tied to any story

**Process:**
1. Read each existing story's description and acceptance criteria
2. Map spec changes to affected stories
3. For each affected story, determine the specific impact
4. Identify if new stories are needed for new workflows

**Present story impact:**
```
## 📌 Story Impact Analysis

### Affected Stories:

[STORY-KEY]: [Story Title]
- Impact: [AC Change / Scope Change]
- Reason: [Which spec change triggers this]
- Proposed Update: [What changes in the story]

### New Stories Needed:
- [Workflow description] - [Why existing stories don't cover it]

### Stories Potentially Obsolete:
- [STORY-KEY]: [Why this may no longer be needed]

### Unaffected Stories: [X stories unchanged]

Proceed with spec + story updates?
```

### 9. Validate Changes

**Validation checklist:**
- [ ] All changes have clear rationale
- [ ] Before/after shows enough context
- [ ] Uncertainty markers properly updated
- [ ] No hallucination - only documented changes
- [ ] Both specs remain internally consistent
- [ ] Updates maintain template structure
- [ ] Story updates match spec changes (no drift)
- [ ] New stories follow INVEST principles
- [ ] No story updated without a corresponding spec change

**Uncertainty handling:**
- Resolved → Remove markers and section entries
- New → Add markers and section entries

### 10. Apply Updates

**If Spec Mode is `combined` (default):**

Invoke the [spec-provider] skill (see platform reference for invocation syntax):
```
update_spec page_id="[spec-id]" body="[UPDATED_SPEC]" version_message="[description]"
```

**If Spec Mode is `separated`:**

For each affected spec (product, tech, or both), invoke the [spec-provider] skill:
```
update_spec page_id="[product-spec-id]" body="[UPDATED_PRODUCT_SPEC]" version_message="[description]"
update_spec page_id="[tech-spec-id]" body="[UPDATED_TECH_SPEC]" version_message="[description]"
```

Only update specs that had changes — skip the companion if it was unaffected.

**Apply story updates (if stories are affected):**

For each affected story, invoke the [story-provider] skill:
```
update_story issue_key="[STORY-KEY]" description="[UPDATED_DESCRIPTION]"
```

For new stories needed, invoke the [story-provider] skill:
```
create_story project_key="[PROJECT]" epic_id="[EPIC-KEY]" story_data="{summary: '...', description: '...', labels: [...]}"
```

For obsolete stories (after user confirmation):
- Add a comment explaining why the story is no longer needed
- Do NOT close or delete — let the user decide the final disposition

### 11. Provide Summary

```
✅ Specification refined!

**Specification:** [Title] - [URL]

What Was Updated:
- Product: [Status per section]
- Technical: [Status per section]
- Resolved questions: [X]
- New questions: [Y]

Key Changes:
1. [Change title]: [What and why]
2. [Change title]: [What and why]
[3-5 most significant]

Coverage Improvement:
- Before: Product ~[X]% | Technical ~[Y]%
- After: Product ~[X]% | Technical ~[Y]%

Story Updates:
- Updated: [N stories] ([STORY-KEY], [STORY-KEY], ...)
- Created: [N new stories] ([STORY-KEY], ...)
- Flagged obsolete: [N stories] ([STORY-KEY], ...)
- Unchanged: [N stories]

Remaining Gaps: [Empty sections if any]

Next: Review → /d3:refine-spec (continue) → /d3:decompose (when ready)
```

---

## Key Principles

1. **Smart detection** - Content determines which spec(s) and stories update
2. **Preserve existing** - Only change what needs changing
3. **One input, both specs** - Product and technical info often intermixed
4. **Track resolution** - Remove resolved uncertainty markers
5. **Add new uncertainties** - New info may raise questions
6. **Spec-story sync** - Stories must reflect the current spec, not a stale version
7. **Minimal story churn** - Only update stories directly affected by spec changes

**Spec Change Types:**
- Addition: New content in empty section
- Enhancement: Adding to existing content
- Modification: Changing existing content
- Clarification: Resolving uncertainty markers
- Resolution: Answering open questions

**Story Impact Types:**
- AC Update: Acceptance criteria changed due to spec change
- Scope Change: Story gains or loses functionality
- New Story: New workflow requires a new story
- Obsolete: Story's purpose removed from spec
- No Impact: Spec change doesn't affect story

---

## Section-by-Section Guidance

**For each section, ask:**
"Does the new information explicitly discuss this?"

**Examples:**

New input mentions "user can filter by date":
- ✅ Update spec: User Journey, Requirements
- ✅ Update stories: Stories covering search/listing workflows → add filter AC
- ❌ Don't touch: API Contracts, Data Models (not discussed)

New input mentions "use PostgreSQL for storage":
- ✅ Update spec: Technical Approach, Data Models
- ✅ Update stories: Stories with technical notes referencing data layer
- ❌ Don't touch: User Journey, Requirements (not discussed)

New input removes a feature ("we decided not to support bulk export"):
- ✅ Update spec: Remove from Requirements, User Journey
- ✅ Flag story: Story covering bulk export → mark as potentially obsolete
- ❌ Don't auto-close: Let user decide

New input adds a new workflow ("we also need an admin approval step"):
- ✅ Update spec: Add to User Journey, Requirements
- ✅ New story needed: Admin approval workflow not covered by existing stories

---

## Expected Outcomes

**Progressive refinement:**
Each session adds only what was discussed. Empty sections remain empty until explicitly addressed.

**Typical refinement:**
- Input about product features → Product spec grows
- Input about technical decisions → Technical spec grows
- Mixed input → Both specs grow

This is CORRECT. Don't try to "complete" sections by guessing.

---

## Error Handling

| Issue | Action |
|-------|--------|
| No changes detected | Inform user, ask for clarification |
| Conflicting info | Show conflict, ask how to resolve |
| Ambiguous updates | Ask which section to update |
| Major scope change | Warn about impact on spec and stories, confirm |
| Spec update fails | Provide full updated text for manual update |
| Story update fails | Provide updated story content for manual update |
| Spec not found | Verify identifier/URL, suggest search |
| Epic not found | Skip story impact analysis, proceed with spec-only refinement |
| Story provider unavailable | Warn, apply spec changes only, list story impacts for manual action |

Commit message:

add quiet mode config setting to skip confirmations in all commands

d3/commands/refine-spec.md, after:

---
description: Refine existing feature specifications based on new information (meeting transcripts, technical decisions, feedback, or discussions). Automatically detects whether changes are product-focused, technical, or both. Updates only affected sections while preserving existing content. When stories already exist for the spec, analyzes impact and proposes story updates. Use when updating specs, adding details to existing documentation, incorporating meeting notes into specs, or when user mentions refining/updating/improving an existing specification.
---

## Core Principle

**Update only what has new information. Preserve everything else.**

Automatically detect which sections need updating - Product, Technical, or both. Don't fill empty sections just because they exist.

**When stories exist:** Spec changes cascade to affected stories. Update story acceptance criteria, scope, and descriptions to stay in sync.

---

## Workflow

### 1. Detect Provider, Templates, Spec Mode, and Settings
- Read `d3.config.md` for D3 config
- Search for ### D3 Config  ### Templates
- Read `Spec Mode` from Spec Provider configuration (default: `combined` when absent)
- Read `Quiet Mode` from Settings (default: `false` when absent)
- If templates (tech and product spec templates) are not configure use skill d3-templates
- Store for later steps

### 2. Fetch Specification
Command accepts spec identifier, URL, or title in `$ARGUMENTS`.

Use provider's `get_spec`:
- Identifier → Use directly
- URL → Extract identifier
- Title → Search, then get_spec

**If Spec Mode is `separated`:**
After fetching, detect which type it is (product or tech) from the title suffix or content structure.
Read the `**Companion Spec:**` header line to identify the paired spec.
Do NOT fetch the companion yet — wait until Step 6 determines whether changes affect both sections.

### 3. Detect Existing Stories
Find the epic matching the spec title and list all its children (stories, tasks, or any issue type).
- Store epic key and child list for later impact analysis
- If no epic or no children found, skip story impact steps later

### 4. Analyze Current State
Display coverage:
```
**Specification:** [Title] - [URL]
**Last Modified:** [Date]

Current Coverage:
- Product: ~[X]% ([sections with content])
- Technical: ~[Y]% ([sections with content])
- Open Questions: [Z] product, [W] technical

Linked Stories: [None / Epic KEY-123 with N stories]
```

### 5. Request Refinement Input

**If quiet mode and new content provided in `$ARGUMENTS`:** Use the provided text directly as refinement input. Skip the question below.

**Otherwise:**
Ask user:
```
How would you like to provide new information?
A) Paste meeting transcript
B) Paste updated documentation
C) Describe changes
D) Paste review feedback
```

### 6. Analyze New Information

**Smart Detection:**
- Identify what's new vs. what exists
- Determine which sections are affected
- Detect if Product, Technical, or both need updates

**CRITICAL - Non-Greedy Updates:**

Update ONLY sections explicitly addressed in new input.

**DO NOT:**
- Invent details not discussed (endpoints, schemas, architectures)
- Elaborate beyond what was stated
- Fill empty sections just because they're empty
- Remove `_To be defined_` without replacement content
- Treat template examples as prompts to fill

**DO:**
- Add only explicitly stated information
- Replace placeholders when discussed
- Add uncertainty markers for ambiguous info
- Preserve empty sections if not discussed

**Section-by-Section Process:**
1. Does new information explicitly address this section?
2. YES → Update with actual content
3. NO → Leave unchanged (existing content OR placeholder)

**If Spec Mode is `separated` — Companion Fetch Optimisation:**
After analysing the new information, determine if changes affect Product sections, Technical sections, or both.
- If changes affect only the fetched spec type → proceed with just that spec, no companion fetch needed
- If changes affect both → fetch the companion spec via `get_spec` using the identifier from the `**Companion Spec:**` header

### 7. Show Proposed Changes

Present clear before/after:
```
Proposed Changes:

## 📋 Product Specification Changes

### [Section Name]
BEFORE: [Current content]
AFTER: [Proposed content]
Rationale: [Why]
Type: [Addition/Modification/Clarification/Resolution]

## 🔧 Technical Specification Changes

### [Section Name]
[Same pattern]

---
Summary:
- Product: [X sections updated, Y questions resolved]
- Technical: [X sections updated, Y questions resolved]
- Resolved: [List]
- New uncertainties: [List]

Does this look correct?
```

**If quiet mode:** Skip presenting proposed changes. Accept all changes and proceed.

### 8. Analyze Story Impact (if stories exist)

**Skip this step if no epic/stories were found in Step 3.**

For each spec change, determine if it affects existing stories:

**Impact Categories:**
- **AC Change:** Spec change modifies requirements covered by a story's acceptance criteria
- **Scope Change:** Spec change adds/removes functionality within a story's scope
- **New Story Needed:** Spec change introduces a new workflow not covered by any existing story
- **Story Obsolete:** Spec change removes functionality that was a story's primary purpose
- **No Impact:** Spec change is informational or affects sections not tied to any story

**Process:**
1. Read each existing story's description and acceptance criteria
2. Map spec changes to affected stories
3. For each affected story, determine the specific impact
4. Identify if new stories are needed for new workflows

**Present story impact:**
```
## 📌 Story Impact Analysis

### Affected Stories:

[STORY-KEY]: [Story Title]
- Impact: [AC Change / Scope Change]
- Reason: [Which spec change triggers this]
- Proposed Update: [What changes in the story]

### New Stories Needed:
- [Workflow description] - [Why existing stories don't cover it]

### Stories Potentially Obsolete:
- [STORY-KEY]: [Why this may no longer be needed]

### Unaffected Stories: [X stories unchanged]

Proceed with spec + story updates?
```

**If quiet mode:** Skip presenting story impact. Proceed with all updates.

### 9. Validate Changes

**Validation checklist:**
- [ ] All changes have clear rationale
- [ ] Before/after shows enough context
- [ ] Uncertainty markers properly updated
- [ ] No hallucination - only documented changes
- [ ] Both specs remain internally consistent
- [ ] Updates maintain template structure
- [ ] Story updates match spec changes (no drift)
- [ ] New stories follow INVEST principles
- [ ] No story updated without a corresponding spec change

**Uncertainty handling:**
- Resolved → Remove markers and section entries
- New → Add markers and section entries

### 10. Apply Updates

**If Spec Mode is `combined` (default):**

Invoke the [spec-provider] skill (see platform reference for invocation syntax):
```
update_spec page_id="[spec-id]" body="[UPDATED_SPEC]" version_message="[description]"
```

**If Spec Mode is `separated`:**

For each affected spec (product, tech, or both), invoke the [spec-provider] skill:
```
update_spec page_id="[product-spec-id]" body="[UPDATED_PRODUCT_SPEC]" version_message="[description]"
update_spec page_id="[tech-spec-id]" body="[UPDATED_TECH_SPEC]" version_message="[description]"
```

Only update specs that had changes — skip the companion if it was unaffected.

**Apply story updates (if stories are affected):**

For each affected story, invoke the [story-provider] skill:
```
update_story issue_key="[STORY-KEY]" description="[UPDATED_DESCRIPTION]"
```

For new stories needed, invoke the [story-provider] skill:
```
create_story project_key="[PROJECT]" epic_id="[EPIC-KEY]" story_data="{summary: '...', description: '...', labels: [...]}"
```

For obsolete stories (after user confirmation):
- Add a comment explaining why the story is no longer needed
- Do NOT close or delete — let the user decide the final disposition

### 11. Provide Summary

```
✅ Specification refined!

**Specification:** [Title] - [URL]

What Was Updated:
- Product: [Status per section]
- Technical: [Status per section]
- Resolved questions: [X]
- New questions: [Y]

Key Changes:
1. [Change title]: [What and why]
2. [Change title]: [What and why]
[3-5 most significant]

Coverage Improvement:
- Before: Product ~[X]% | Technical ~[Y]%
- After: Product ~[X]% | Technical ~[Y]%

Story Updates:
- Updated: [N stories] ([STORY-KEY], [STORY-KEY], ...)
- Created: [N new stories] ([STORY-KEY], ...)
- Flagged obsolete: [N stories] ([STORY-KEY], ...)
- Unchanged: [N stories]

Remaining Gaps: [Empty sections if any]

Next: Review → /d3:refine-spec (continue) → /d3:decompose (when ready)
```

---

## Key Principles

1. **Smart detection** - Content determines which spec(s) and stories update
2. **Preserve existing** - Only change what needs changing
3. **One input, both specs** - Product and technical info often intermixed
4. **Track resolution** - Remove resolved uncertainty markers
5. **Add new uncertainties** - New info may raise questions
6. **Spec-story sync** - Stories must reflect the current spec, not a stale version
7. **Minimal story churn** - Only update stories directly affected by spec changes

**Spec Change Types:**
- Addition: New content in empty section
- Enhancement: Adding to existing content
- Modification: Changing existing content
- Clarification: Resolving uncertainty markers
- Resolution: Answering open questions

**Story Impact Types:**
- AC Update: Acceptance criteria changed due to spec change
- Scope Change: Story gains or loses functionality
- New Story: New workflow requires a new story
- Obsolete: Story's purpose removed from spec
- No Impact: Spec change doesn't affect story

---

## Section-by-Section Guidance

**For each section, ask:**
"Does the new information explicitly discuss this?"

**Examples:**

New input mentions "user can filter by date":
- ✅ Update spec: User Journey, Requirements
- ✅ Update stories: Stories covering search/listing workflows → add filter AC
- ❌ Don't touch: API Contracts, Data Models (not discussed)

New input mentions "use PostgreSQL for storage":
- ✅ Update spec: Technical Approach, Data Models
- ✅ Update stories: Stories with technical notes referencing data layer
- ❌ Don't touch: User Journey, Requirements (not discussed)

New input removes a feature ("we decided not to support bulk export"):
- ✅ Update spec: Remove from Requirements, User Journey
- ✅ Flag story: Story covering bulk export → mark as potentially obsolete
- ❌ Don't auto-close: Let user decide

New input adds a new workflow ("we also need an admin approval step"):
- ✅ Update spec: Add to User Journey, Requirements
- ✅ New story needed: Admin approval workflow not covered by existing stories

---

## Expected Outcomes

**Progressive refinement:**
Each session adds only what was discussed. Empty sections remain empty until explicitly addressed.

**Typical refinement:**
- Input about product features → Product spec grows
- Input about technical decisions → Technical spec grows
- Mixed input → Both specs grow

This is CORRECT. Don't try to "complete" sections by guessing.

---

## Error Handling

| Issue | Action |
|-------|--------|
| No changes detected | Inform user, ask for clarification |
| Conflicting info | Show conflict, ask how to resolve |
| Ambiguous updates | Ask which section to update |
| Major scope change | Warn about impact on spec and stories, confirm |
| Spec update fails | Provide full updated text for manual update |
| Story update fails | Provide updated story content for manual update |
| Spec not found | Verify identifier/URL, suggest search |
| Epic not found | Skip story impact analysis, proceed with spec-only refinement |
| Story provider unavailable | Warn, apply spec changes only, list story impacts for manual action |
